Welcome to the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on Science Fiction today.
A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
And now your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. Keith Johnson.
And David Carson in this show will be on Time Travel.
Using anybody's life there's always been a time when you wish you could have gone back
and done something different. Yes, most science fiction authors would admit,
for instance Larry Niven himself does, who's written articles on time travel, that it is
impossible and any author who uses the theme or the environment of time travel for a story
is simply plain, engaging in wish fulfillment or writing the classic what if science fiction
stories since time travel obviously seems to be impossible.
But recently there have been authors who have, or scientists I should say who have written
on the subject and developed some fairly interesting ideas.
I think first of all what I would recognize about time is that it's not a fixed thing.
If we wanted to this evening we could walk out and look into the past.
Simply by looking at the stars we're looking millions of years into the past.
So it's not a fixed thing. It's something which you can play with with some scientific
justification. Einstein's theory of relativity I believe indicates that as velocity increases,
time goes more slowly. Of course that's only a one way trip.
You can take a trip into the future merely by putting yourself in a rocket ship that
can travel at a sizable fraction of the speed of light.
When you come back to the earth, the earth will have aged perhaps a million years and
you are only five minutes older if your rocket ship will go that fast.
But you can't go back into the past. You are stuck with that earth which will be somewhat
unfamiliar.
Well you're not manipulating time, no in that sense. You're not really traveling in it.
Haven't there been experiments where they've proven, say putting clocks on airplanes and
leaving some fixed where time, I mean it can be shown this is a fact.
Yes.
Time can be slowed down.
Yes they really have. Take two atomic clocks, put one on an airplane which flies around
the world and when the second clock gets back and is compared with the first clock it's
lost a microsecond, a millionth of a second.
Now you can't do too much with that but if you multiply that by a large fraction, a large
number, then you can build a pretty good science fiction story around it and many authors have.
With that beginning, with that basis in Einstein's theory of relativity, why can't we perceive
as Dr. Robert Forward has done in his article, How to Build a Time Machine, why can't we
conceive or imagine of a, say using a black hole which supposedly is so dense, so collapsing
at such a tremendous rate of speed that time is distorted.
Yes, Einstein for example, views the universe as a fabric not only of space but of space
plus time so that if you can somehow distort that you can perhaps bend the universe so
to speak enough so that you could travel in time and one way of bending the universe is
with a tremendous gravitational field. In fact that's what Einstein says gravity is.
So in the vicinity of a black hole time and space are so distorted you should be able
to according to our current equations be able to go forward or backward in time simply by
going around a black hole or some kind of condensed heavy object like that in a suitable
direction at a suitable rate of speed. Now these are only equations, the theory says
that this might be the case and it still has to be confirmed. It hasn't, that part of relativity
has not been confirmed the way some of the other things have.
But doesn't current physics theory allow for instance for the creation of say miniature
supernova, miniature black hole say with particle bombardment. Aren't some of the velocities
reached by particles sufficient to in theory create a supernova, a miniature black hole
which can be used for time alteration?
Not at present. We don't see a way of creating a miniature black hole. However some people
have thought that in the original Big Bang, the tremendous explosion that according to
current theory created the universe, there might have been some miniature black holes
that were created and we would not have detected them because after all they are black and
in the blackness of outer space you wouldn't be able to see them and these might be utilized
eventually to travel in time.
Let's put it this way in theory. If there are such things as black holes, Dr. Forward
writes that if we were able to, assuming a black hole is a collapsing star, a giant star
is collapsing, it has a velocity, it has a spin, perhaps with an elliptical shape to
it bulging at the equator. He writes that if we could somehow, if we had the technology,
if we had the engineering to induce that bulge to reshape itself into a donut shape, the
middle of the black hole would then become sort of a time gate. If one entered it one
would be traveling through time.
The problem with a normal black hole, just a spherical collapsed object is that when
you go into it, you usually cannot get out and terrible things happen to you at the middle.
We don't even know what but we know that it would be pretty drastic. But if you could
spin a black hole very rapidly, it would spin out into a donut and the center of it would
be accessible and presumably, possibly, you wouldn't pull yourself apart into your constituent
atoms when you go through the center. I don't know how we could do it. Forward seems to
think that with current technology, we could create a black hole donut. I think we're
quite a ways away from that yet.
But he does write at the end of his article, he does admit, he says, okay, the manipulation
of a black hole or the time traveling itself with people involved, he says that's probably
thousands of years away. But he does write that perhaps within a hundred years, we would
have the technology to send information back in time, say, using creating miniature black
holes with particle bombardments.
Or even using miniature black holes that we happen to stumble across in our exploration
of the solar system.
But he seems to think that within a hundred years, we can send information, not people,
back into the past, which of course could be used to change the past.
It's a lot easier to send, say, a gamma ray back into the past than it would be a gross
human being.
Time travel is one of the most recent themes used in science fiction.
I think the reason for that is that the ancient, say, the classical world, and some people,
by the way, take science fiction themes all the way back to the Greek and Roman days.
But I don't think they can do that with time travel because the concept of time in the
classical world, say, with the Greeks and Romans in the BC era, was totally different
from the one that we have today. They didn't conceive of time as a progression, as a series
of causes and effects. For instance, the future. To a classical Greek, the future was going
to be just about like the present. The idea of evolution was not part of their worldview.
The future would be the same as the present. The past was also different to them. Today,
if a science fiction author or a creative writer wanted to reproduce something or write
about the past, he may take his hero back into the past, a traveling process. That would
not be alien to the Greeks. All they would have to do if they wanted to see somebody
from the past is to say, travel to Hades, as Homer had some of his heroes do. If they
wanted to meet somebody who was dead or go over past events, they would simply meet the
person involved by going to Hades. This is where he would be. His abode. But in the sense
of something gone, finished, done, irretrievable, their concept of time would not allow for
that. So the time travel story was not something that they would use.
From the time when a concept of time as a continuing progression, up until the time
that science fiction began to catch on, people did use the concept of time travel in certain
ways, but not as an exploration of the time travel, as per se, by itself. But they only
used it as a means to put their protagonist into some particular situation or to explore
a particular theme. One of the earliest of these was Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol,
in which Scrooge was taken back to his past and shown scenes of his early childhood, and
then taken into his far future and shown scenes of what the future would be like after he
had died, to show the contrast between these two and to show him where he was headed if
he continued on his current path. That same sort of thing was extrapolated on by Mark
Twain in the Connecticut Yankee and King Arthur's Court, where a young man working in a factory
was struck over the head, and when he woke up, he was in ancient England under the reign
of King Arthur, and then he brought 19th century technology into the 14th century and in various
ways brought havoc in King Arthur's kingdom.
Wasn't there the possibility in that book that he was only dreaming that? Didn't he
sort of wake up and enter back into the present?
That's true. It's a wish fulfillment type story.
So in essence, you can't really say that it was time travel. The method is unimportant.
As Keith said, it was simply the going back, whether it was a dream or a vision or however.
I think in many cases an author might come up with the idea, what if I had a 19th century
man in 14th century England and he had all this advanced technological expertise, what
would he do, what would it be like, and of course Mark Twain's character went about and
he invented the telephone and steam engines and electrical generators, and at the end of
the story he was fighting a terrific battle with Merlin using all sorts of electric fences
and fireworks and magnetic devices to hold the knights in armor rooted to the spot.
Of course, Twain being Twain, he developed a great deal of humor or satire cleverness
in this story. It was mostly a humorous novel. It's the reason he wrote it. Of course, that
was Twain's method. But probably I think most science fiction commentators, in fact I would
say all of them are almost unanimous in agreeing that the first modern time travel story was
H. G. Wells, The Time Machine, published in 1895.
That's the first time travel story in which the protagonist uses a device in order to travel through time.
You'd probably say that story would have a social purpose to it.
Yes, as Wells wrote it, he was sort of a commentary on Victorian England of his time. He was contrasting
the upper class with the newly developing middle class and working class citizens as
the Morlocks in the book who were the sort of troglodytes lived underground, worked with
machinery all the time, and the Eloi who lived above ground were what we would call, I guess,
the beautiful people.
We might note also that even though Wells was the first one to really use a machine
for the passage through time, there was no method to the machine. I mean, there was
no physics, no mechanics, no theory behind it.
No, just flashing lights and dials and numbers.
It looked good. It sounded good.
Yes, it looked good in the movie too.
Right.
Yes, a lot of the social commentary was lost in the movie.
Then, of course, I would say that probably some of the best known modern science fiction
novels of the time travel would carry forward the serious purpose that Wells had in his
story, the time machine.
Many modern books would have a social message or a reason for using the time travel motif.
Such a book like that might be Pavane by Keith Roberts.
That book was a, what if the Spanish Armada had won that naval engagement in England had
been different than what it is now, and the Catholic Church came in and suppressed technology.
Its time frame is our present, but their methods of communication and locomotion are
extremely archaic compared to ours.
They communicate over long distance using huge towers that use a semaphore, flags and
gates for communication, and they travel our hull heavy loads over long distances using
an antiquated version of steam engine.
Occasionally, one runs into a story in which time travel, per se, is central to the novel.
It is the central feature that is being explored.
One of the most complex and enjoyable of these was written by the incredibly prolific author,
Isaac Asimov, back in the mid-50s called The End of Eternity.
In this novel, Asimov sets up in a core of time travelers who are trying to improve the
earth. They can travel through centuries. They can drop into any particular century,
institute some kind of change, come back out into their little protected universe, which
is separate from the main time stream, and see what happens. If it is a favorable change,
according to their lights, then they leave it in. If not, they can go back and change
it.
But it turns out in the novel that society has become stagnant because of this. History
is no longer a dynamic process when you can look at the whole thing. Asimov has his novel
ending optimistically when his hero manages to destroy the entire alternate time stream
and makes time travel impossible. But it is an interesting way of treating time travel
and introduces several new concepts on that theme.
Almost any time travel story has to be based on causation. As in Povane, the man in the
high castle, the end of eternity. Alterations are made in time, either in the future or
in the past. Something is removed, some cause which changes in effect. I would say that
any time travel story has to be based on causation. And some novels are very emphatic
in developing that idea. For example, Sprague de Campes, a very well known book, Less Darkness
Fall, deals with a situation in which the protagonist is somehow transported back to
ancient Rome. I think he was struck by a bolt of lightning. The method wasn't so important.
He was thinking about Rome for some reason. He was struck by lightning, he got transported
back to ancient Rome. He happened to be an archeologist, he happened to be knowledgeable
about the classical world. And he knew his history well. And he got the idea of making
very small changes back in ancient Rome in the days of its fall with the idea of preserving
civilization. In history, after the fall of Rome, we have what's called the Dark Ages.
The loss of knowledge, the beginning of barbarism, say a thousand years of darkness, knowledge
was lost. He initiates very small changes which ensure the retention of knowledge, the
small things he keeps alive that will someday again lead to civilization.
How can he be sure that this is in fact what will happen?
Well he doesn't know for sure. All he can do is perform certain actions with his knowledge
of history, what had happened in the future. And what we assume that the changes he makes
have caused our world to be what it is today. Because of what he did, we are the way we
are. We have civilization again.
So he believes that you make small changes in the past and that can radically change the
future. A lot of authors have pursued this theme. One of the best is a short story by
Ray Bradbury called A Sound of Thunder. In this novel or in this short story, Bradbury
takes a group of dinosaur hunters back and they are allowed to kill a dinosaur, cut off
its head, bring it forward into the future, back into their present. But to avoid making
any changes that are significant, the only dinosaurs that the hunters are allowed to
kill are ones that are going to die in a couple of minutes anyway. Scouts have gone back earlier
and checked out which dinosaurs are going to be hit over the head with falling trees
or die of old age or something like that. And they have a path that they must stay on,
some kind of force field path. In the novel, one of the hunters goes back, steps off the
path in a moment of panic and crushes a small butterfly. It's the only change he makes.
But when he comes back, the entire future has been changed. A different president has
been elected. The society has become much more violent and much more oppressive. And
things have changed completely. Not everybody agrees that this is what's the kind of thing
that would happen, but it's an interesting thing to pursue.
I thought the causation in that story was fascinating because instead of taking what
you would assume to be something huge, a big cause, you know, something, you know, like
assassinating a Napoleon or keeping a Lincoln from being assassinated or something. Brad
Ray takes something so small, you know, simply the crushing of one butterfly and shows that
such a trivial event can cause the entire future to be changed.
Another interesting facet of time travel stories is Paradox. And one of the favorite paradoxes
is the grandfather paradox. Let's say your grandfather invented a time machine, but
you hate your grandfather, so you steal his time machine and travel back 60 years and
kill him. But you killed him before he met your grandmother. So therefore you weren't
born, so you couldn't kill your grandfather. And you couldn't have traveled back in time.
A paradox, that's right. A lot of science fiction authors play around with that one.
If you were able to go back into the past, what if you met yourself? Or what if you did
something to yourself back in the past or one of your ancestors that would prevent your
being in the present? I think another paradox, too, would involve the future. If you could
travel into the future and if you could come back, how could you remember what you have
done or how could you bring anything back? The future has not yet occurred. And if you
brought back some information, then you would be changing the present from what it had been.
And this I think is the core of many of these paradoxes.
Larry Niven and his essays has come up with several interesting ideas on time travel. One
of them being that no matter what a time traveler does in the past, he can't change the future.
If he goes back and saved Lincoln from being assassinated, then President Lincoln might
slip and fall down the stairs in the Ford Theater when leaving the theater that night
and die as a result of that accident. That's called the conservation of events.
A number of authors have treated this idea. The time stream has a certain amount of inertia
and it takes a lot of effort to make even small changes in it. Fritz Lieber wrote a
story, I believe it was Lieber, in which he is trying to prevent a certain person from
being killed by being shot in the head. And he goes back and he changes the past repeatedly
and something happens to cancel his changes. Finally, he goes back and makes one big change,
making it impossible for anyone to shoot this particular person. And a small meteorite comes
down from outer space and goes through his head, accomplishing exactly the same event.
James B. Hogan, a recent addition to the ranks of science fiction authors, has written
several novels steeply based in science fact. Among those being the Genesis Machine, Inherit
the Stars, the General Giants of Ganymede, Two Faces of Tomorrow, and the novel which
we will now look at, Thrice Upon a Time.
Thrice Upon a Time is Hogan's latest book, his fifth novel. The setting is the Highlands
of Scotland in the year 2009, 2010. And we first meet Sir Charles Ross, who is a genius
in theoretical physics. He's won a Nobel Prize years before and he now works alone in his
ancestral castle. And he's pursuing a phenomenon he discovered years before. While experimenting
with the conversion of mass into energy, bombarding electrons with sufficient force to annihilate
them. Physics theory says that the energy liberated by the annihilation of mass should be equal
to the mass being annihilated. But in Sir Charles' experiments it's not. He finally finds out
that a small amount of energy, the inequality comes about because a small amount of energy
is lost. And he finally figures out where it's gone. It's gone into the past. And he's
now learned to control that lost energy and send information into the past. He sends this
information to himself and receives it on the machine that he's rigged up for that purpose.
As the novel gets moving, Sir Charles sends for his grandson Murdoch, who's a bright young
man working in the United States. And he wants Murdoch to help him with his research. Murdoch
arrives, begins to aid his grandfather in his time research, and meets Anne in a nearby
village and falls in love with her. Complications obviously need to arise and they do very quickly.
Two potential catastrophes develop. Both catastrophes sufficient to wipe out life on the earth. This
may sound like a big coincidence that such huge things could happen in the space of a
few pages, but the book is so realistic we don't really question them. But for each potential
catastrophe Murdoch alters the past with his grandfather's machine. Avert's disaster,
but he also changes the present when he does so. The first catastrophe involves a dysfunctional
fusion reactor. The reactor accelerates particles to such speeds that they become miniature supernovas.
Then miniature black holes. And even though they're miniature, they're deadly. They zing
around the earth and punch holes in people and objects. Murdoch sends a warning into
the past on his grandfather's machine. This allows the reactor people to correct the flaw
and everything seems to be okay except in the new timeline, the new present, the altered
present which comes about because of Murdoch's tampering with the past. He doesn't meet Anne.
The second potential disaster comes from a plague which is beginning because of a deadly
virus spread by mistake from a biological research satellite. An antidote fails because of another
mistake. Murdoch again sends information back into the past which removes the mistake causing
the bad antidote and once again the world is saved. So a new timeline is set up, a new present,
the third since the novel began. This must be where the title comes from, Thrice Upon a Time.
In this altered present, it seems as if Murdoch and Anne will meet and become close again because
of the help of a kitten named Maxwell. So the book ends on a positive note, both in the personal
life of Murdoch and Anne and on the, well, the more universal plane where these catastrophes have
been averted. My reactions to the book are very positive. I have a great liking for Hogan's,
all of his fiction. If his first five novels are any indication of what he'll do in the future,
I think he'll be one of the greatest names in the field by the time he's done. The novel illustrates
his strongest point, I think, and that's realism. The book is grounded in hard science and present
physics theory to the point where everything seems possible. You ask, why isn't this being
done right now? Why isn't somebody sending information into the past? It's so plausible,
so meticulously worked out. It seems to me that maybe either he read Forward's article that we
refer to earlier or Forward has read Hogan's book because Hogan is writing about the sending of
information into the past, small bits of information into the recent past, which is what Forward said
at the end of his article, we would have the technology to perform within 100 years. This book,
I think, occurs about maybe 40 years into the future. My only criticism is that it does start
slowly. There's a lot of science at the beginning of the book. The characters engage in dialogue
that makes them sound like professors lecturing at a symposium about theories of physics and so
forth. But it does pick up. The action accelerates, the romantic plot helps, and the reader finds it
difficult to put the book down because he's interested in seeing what will happen and how it
will happen. Overall, I think he's done a very impressive job of making time travel believable.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with Odessa College and KOCV FM.